.\" $OpenBSD: sendbug.1,v 1.28 2016/07/13 20:31:27 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Written by Raymond Lai <ray@cyth.net>.
.\" Public domain.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 13 2016 $
.Dt SENDBUG 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sendbug
.Nd report a bug in LibertyBSD
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl DEP
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is used to submit problem reports (PRs) to the
LibertyBSD
bugs e-mail address.
A template PR is opened in a text editor
with some system information already filled in,
such as machine architecture,
.Xr dmesg 8 ,
.Xr usbdevs 8 ,
.Xr pcidump 8 ,
and
.Xr acpidump 8 .
The
.Xr pcidump 8
and
.Xr acpidump 8
output are important for ACPI development and can only be included if
.Nm
is run as root.
.Pp
Fields enclosed in
.Sq <>
should be completed by the user.
Once the PR is filled out,
the user exits the editor and is presented with a choice:
a)bort, e)dit, or s)end.
If abort is selected,
the report is not deleted and the pathname of the report is printed.
If edit is selected,
the user is given a chance to re-edit the report.
.Pp
If send is selected,
the report is mailed to the bugs inbox,
with a Cc to the author.
After which it will be added to the official bug tracker,
and any developments will be forwarded to you.
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl D
Do not attach
.Xr dmesg 8 ,
.Xr usbdevs 8 ,
.Xr pcidump 8 ,
and
.Xr acpidump 8
output to the report.
This information is very helpful in reports,
but may contain sensitive information about the sender.
This flag helps protect users' privacy in those cases.
.It Fl E
The
.Xr acpidump 8
output includes base64 encoded files.
This flag causes
.Nm
to read a PR from the standard input, decode the files,
and write them into the current directory.
.It Fl P
Generate and print the template with system information filled out.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev EDITOR , VISUAL
Specifies an editor to use.
If both
.Ev EDITOR
and
.Ev VISUAL
are set,
.Ev VISUAL
takes precedence.
If neither
.Ev EDITOR
nor
.Ev VISUAL
are set,
the default is
.Xr vi 1 .
.It Ev PR_FORM
Filename of PR form to use instead of using the built-in form.
Such a PR form can be partially pre-completed to make the
process faster.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/tmp/p.XXXXXXXXXX" -compact
.It Pa /tmp/p.XXXXXXXXXX
temporary PR report
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr crash 8 ,
.Xr dmesg 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.Nm
was written from scratch for the public domain by
.An Ray Lai Aq Mt ray@cyth.net .
